README.md, before:

# Shannon Game

## Overview
This project implements a Shannon game for English text using a character-level trigram (3-gram) model, inspired by Claude Shannon’s paper Prediction and Entropy of Printed English (1951).

The goal is to demonstrate the core idea computationally:


*The predictability of language can be measured by how difficult it is to guess the next symbol given prior context.*

## How Prediction Works

This project splits the brown corpus into training and a testing/evaluation, where 80% of the Brown corpus is used only to learn statistics of English, and the remaining 20% (the testing), is used to play the Shannon game.

### Training Set
Using the training set `brown_train.txt`, the trigram model records:
- How frequently each character follows a given two-character context

- For example:
`"th" → 'e' occurs most often, followed by 'a', 'i', etc.`

No prediction or guessing is performed on the training data.

### Testing Set
Using the testing set `brown_test.txt`, 
- The two character context is taken from the testing set itself,
- and the third character as well is taken from the testing set

The model then ranks possible next characters using only statistics learned from the training corpus

### What the Number of Guesses Mean?
- A low guess rank (e.g., Guess 1 or Guess 2) means the next character was highly predictable
- A high guess rank means the context allowed many plausible continuations

## Project Structure

```text
shannon_game/
├── data/
│   ├── brown_train.txt      # Training corpus
│   └── brown_test.txt       # Test corpus (unseen during training)
├── src/
│   ├── preprocess.py        # Loads and cleans the Brown corpus
│   ├── ngram_model.py       # Trigram language model
│   ├── shannon_game.py      # Shannon prediction game logic
│   └── main.py              # Runs the full experiment
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

## Module Descriptions

`preprocess.py`

- Downloads the Brown corpus using NLTK
- Converts text to lowercase
- Removes punctuation and non-alphabetic characters
- Treats space as a valid character
- Splits the corpus into:
- 80% training data
- 20% test data

Saves cleaned text as .txt files for transparency

`ngram_model.py`

- Implements a trigram (N = 3) character model
- Uses:
    - 2-character context → next character prediction
- Stores frequency counts of next characters for each context
- Provides ranked predictions based on frequency

This models the statistical structure of English at the character level.

`shannon_game.py`

- Implements the Shannon game
- For each character in the test text:
    - Uses the previous two characters as context
    - Guesses the next character in order of likelihood
    - Records the number of guesses required
- Aggregates guess-rank statistics

This simulates Shannon’s original prediction experiments programmatically.

`main.py`

- Loads training and test text
- Trains the trigram model
- Runs the Shannon game
- Prints a summary of prediction results

## How to Run

### Install dependencies
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Preprocess the corpus
```
python src/preprocess.py
```

### Run the Shannon game
```
python src/preprocess.py
```

Commit message:

Enhance README with entropy and redundancy details
Added explanation of entropy and redundancy estimation.

README.md, after:

# Shannon Game

## Overview
This project implements a Shannon game for English text using a character-level trigram (3-gram) model, inspired by Claude Shannon’s paper Prediction and Entropy of Printed English (1951).

The goal is to demonstrate the core idea computationally:


*The predictability of language can be measured by how difficult it is to guess the next symbol given prior context.*

## How Prediction Works

This project splits the brown corpus into training and a testing/evaluation, where 80% of the Brown corpus is used only to learn statistics of English, and the remaining 20% (the testing), is used to play the Shannon game.

### Training Set
Using the training set `brown_train.txt`, the trigram model records:
- How frequently each character follows a given two-character context

- For example:
`"th" → 'e' occurs most often, followed by 'a', 'i', etc.`

No prediction or guessing is performed on the training data.

### Testing Set
Using the testing set `brown_test.txt`, 
- The two character context is taken from the testing set itself,
- and the third character as well is taken from the testing set

The model then ranks possible next characters using only statistics learned from the training corpus

### What the Number of Guesses Mean?
- A low guess rank (e.g., Guess 1 or Guess 2) means the next character was highly predictable
- A high guess rank means the context allowed many plausible continuations


**Entropy and redundancy are estimated from the Shannon game by converting guess-rank frequencies into an average information measure. If the correct character is found at rank 𝑟, it contributes approximately log⁡2(𝑟) bits of information. Averaging this quantity over the test corpus yields an empirical estimate of entropy, from which redundancy is computed relative to the maximum possible entropy.**

## Project Structure

```text
shannon_game/
├── data/
│   ├── brown_train.txt      # Training corpus
│   └── brown_test.txt       # Test corpus (unseen during training)
├── src/
│   ├── preprocess.py        # Loads and cleans the Brown corpus
│   ├── ngram_model.py       # Trigram language model
│   ├── shannon_game.py      # Shannon prediction game logic
│   └── main.py              # Runs the full experiment
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

## Module Descriptions

`preprocess.py`

- Downloads the Brown corpus using NLTK
- Converts text to lowercase
- Removes punctuation and non-alphabetic characters
- Treats space as a valid character
- Splits the corpus into:
- 80% training data
- 20% test data

Saves cleaned text as .txt files for transparency

`ngram_model.py`

- Implements a trigram (N = 3) character model
- Uses:
    - 2-character context → next character prediction
- Stores frequency counts of next characters for each context
- Provides ranked predictions based on frequency

This models the statistical structure of English at the character level.

`shannon_game.py`

- Implements the Shannon game
- For each character in the test text:
    - Uses the previous two characters as context
    - Guesses the next character in order of likelihood
    - Records the number of guesses required
- Aggregates guess-rank statistics

This simulates Shannon’s original prediction experiments programmatically.

`main.py`

- Loads training and test text
- Trains the trigram model
- Runs the Shannon game
- Prints a summary of prediction results

## How to Run

### Install dependencies
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Preprocess the corpus
```
python src/preprocess.py
```

### Run the Shannon game
```
python src/preprocess.py
```
